pyncraft example ideas
======================

The thing that makes starrynight.py work is a pattern, not a trick: take a real
professional library, get coordinates out of it, and turn those into blocks. A
kid ends up having driven the same code an astronomer uses. Everything below is
that same shape, which is why the first entry matters more than any of them.

Rough effort/payoff is one person's guess, not gospel.


0. THE SHARED PIECE, worth building first
-----------------------------------------
Every idea here ends in "now put a few hundred thousand blocks in the world".
Right now that means one setBlock per round trip, which is slow enough to be
the limiting factor. render_stl.py already does the interesting half of this
(voxelise, then place), and it should be pulled out of the example and into the
library as something like:

    mc.buildVoxels(array_or_points, palette)

taking a numpy array or a list of (x, y, z, material), batching the writes, and
handling the offset/scale so the build lands where the player is standing.

The server side already cooperates: world.setBlocks fills a cuboid in one
call, and pyncraft's savedBlocks path batches individual placements. Neither is
the front door yet.

Do this and every idea below is a fifty-line adapter. Skip it and each one
re-implements the same loop, slowly.

Effort: medium. Payoff: unlocks everything else.


1. REAL TERRAIN FROM GIS DATA
-----------------------------
Build your own neighbourhood. "That's my school" is the most motivating thing
on this list, and the libraries are boring and standard, which is a compliment.

Ground comes from a DEM (digital elevation model) via rasterio: read the
raster, crop to a bounding box, scale metres to blocks, and place a column per
cell. That part is nearly trivial.

Buildings do NOT come for free, and this is the thing to know up front. A DEM
is bare earth. There are two ways to get buildings:

  a. OpenStreetMap footprints, via osmnx or the Overpass API. Every building is
     a polygon, often with building:levels or height tags. Fill the polygon,
     extrude to the height (or 3m per level, or a default if untagged). This is
     the practical route: it works anywhere OSM has coverage, which for a US
     town is usually good, and gives recognisable blocky buildings.

  b. Lidar, which measures the surface INCLUDING rooftops. The difference
     between the surface model and the terrain model is, roughly, the
     buildings and trees. Massachusetts has excellent public lidar through
     MassGIS, and USGS 3DEP covers most of the country. More faithful, much
     more data wrangling, and roofs come out lumpy rather than crisp.

Suggested first example: Roberts Elementary, Medford MA. Ground from USGS 3DEP
or MassGIS, buildings from OSM footprints, a few hundred metres on a side.
Ship the extracted heightmap as a small data file so the example runs without
network access, and put the download script next to it for anyone who wants
their own town.

Libraries: rasterio, osmnx (or plain requests against Overpass), numpy.
Effort: medium. Payoff: highest on this list.


2. CRYSTAL STRUCTURES
---------------------
Minecraft is literally a cubic lattice, so crystals map onto it better than
onto anything else. Salt, diamond, graphite, ice come out structurally correct
rather than approximated, and you can walk through the unit cell at a scale
where the geometry is obvious.

pymatgen or ASE will hand you fractional coordinates and lattice vectors for
any structure; multiply out a few unit cells, map element to a wool or concrete
colour, place. Structures come free from the Materials Project.

Nice extension: the same code shows why diamond is hard and graphite is soft,
because you can see the sheets.

Libraries: pymatgen or ase, numpy.
Effort: low. Payoff: high, and unusually well matched to the medium.


3. MARS AND THE MOON
--------------------
Same machinery as (1), better subject. MOLA (Mars) and LOLA (Moon) elevation
data are public, global, and already gridded, so there are no buildings to
worry about and no licensing to check.

Walking the actual floor of Gale Crater, at real proportions, is the kind of
thing a ten year old remembers. Olympus Mons needs vertical exaggeration or it
just reads as a slope.

Data: NASA PDS. Libraries: rasterio (or plain numpy on the .img), astropy for
the coordinate handling.
Effort: low once (1) exists, since it is the same pipeline pointed at different
data. Payoff: high.


4. PROTEIN FOLDING
------------------
Biopython's Bio.PDB parses a structure file straight from RCSB and gives atom
coordinates directly. Scale up, colour by element, place. A kid types a four
character code and haemoglobin appears.

The catch is size: a medium protein is tens of thousands of atoms, so this
wants (0) to exist first. Backbone-only mode (alpha carbons, connected) is a
good default, with all-atoms as an option.

Libraries: biopython, numpy.
Effort: low-medium. Payoff: high.


5. REDSTONE FROM A HARDWARE DESCRIPTION
---------------------------------------
The scoped version of "build a working computer". Rather than designing a CPU
by hand, take a real hardware description -- Amaranth is Python and pleasant,
or a Verilog netlist via pyverilog -- and lay out the corresponding redstone
gates automatically.

"My Python program built a working adder out of redstone" is a genuine on-ramp
to digital design, and logicgates.py is already most of the primitive gates.

The full computer is a months-long rabbit hole and the connection to
professional tooling gets thin fast. Importing a PCB layout (KiCad) is
possible but the payoff is a flat picture of a circuit board.

Libraries: amaranth or pyverilog.
Effort: high. Payoff: high for the right kid, narrow otherwise.


6. MUSIC
--------
music21 is a real musicology library out of MIT. Parse a score, build a note
roller or a noteblock machine that plays it, or just render the melody as a
3D bar chart you can walk along.

Libraries: music21.
Effort: medium. Payoff: high, and it reaches kids the maths route misses.


7. MACHINE LEARNING YOU CAN WALK THROUGH
-----------------------------------------
Train a small decision tree on something a kid picked, then build the tree as
an actual branching structure they walk down, each junction labelled with a
sign. Or a small network's weights as a 3D field.

Makes something abstract physical, and scikit-learn is genuinely professional.

Libraries: scikit-learn.
Effort: low. Payoff: medium-high.


8. A REAL NOTEBOOK EXAMPLE
--------------------------
A Jupyter notebook is a good format for this audience: text, code and output
in one place, and readable on GitHub without running it. mwrowe's notebook in
PR #3 has a nice "subway system" build but needs mciwb, altair, pandas and
RCON, so it cannot run for someone who just pip installed pyncraft.

Worth writing one that needs only pyncraft and numpy. Keep the outputs in it so
it reads on GitHub, but keep them small -- one cell in that PR was a 108KB
rendered dataframe, about half the file.

Effort: low. Payoff: high, mostly as a teaching on-ramp.


NOTES
-----
- Prefer libraries with wheels everywhere. A dependency that compiles from
  source is a wall for exactly the kid we want, on exactly the machine they
  have. This is why pyncraft depends on numpy and nothing else.
- Ship sample data with each example so it runs offline, with the fetch script
  beside it for anyone who wants their own.
- Every one of these is a "professional library -> coordinates -> blocks"
  adapter. If a new one does not fit that shape, it probably belongs in the
  library rather than in examples/.
